8 CONCLUSION & OUTLOOK In this paper we contribute an initial guideline for autonomous driving experience design, bringing together the areas of UX, XAI and autonomous driving. Our goal was to evaluate if a positive effect on UX can be achieved by explanations about the AV driving during and after the ride. Focussing on visual explanations seemed most adequate as the shuttle simulated the ride primarily on its screens. Using additional modalities, which are also related to driving, such as sound or seat vibration, could be tested further. Yet, it is to be expected that there is a threshold at which additional information confuses or overwhelms the passenger. In an early design phase, we had the idea to see if it makes a difference whether explanations are presented on the vehicle’s display or on a passenger’s personal mobile phone, i.e., if the use of a personal item may cause a priori trust. Thus, using personal, familiar display items versus non-familiar display items could be another experimental setup.

While the use of an AV simulator creates a better live experience than just a screen, it is still not a real driving situation. Putting the test scenario into a driving simulator or a real trafc context could also be an option to pursue further. Our experiment focused solely on frst-time users who did not interact with AVs before or users with little experience in that area. We expect that the need for explanations decreases over time when passengers are more used to the interaction. Assuming that passengers will use their driving time for other activities during their ride, the driving situation and its explanations may become less relevant. Longitudinal studies can lead to further insights.

Given that our research falls into the intersection of UX and XAI, there are more questions in general. One question is whether UX is more positive when using the exact algorithmic output from a visual recognition system on the screen or the more abstract (visual and verbal) descriptions on it. Providing the option to browse through different layers, from low-level feature analysis to high-level explanations, could be of interest to users and improve their technical understanding and potentially their UX and trust in the system, at least for certain user groups. Other user groups might prefer information that is further reduced, thus having a personalised way to let passengers choose their information channel is an interesting topic to pursue. Again, the effect of prolonged use, including critical situations, needs to be examined in further studies.

The acknowledgments section is defined using the "acks" environment (and NOT an unnumbered section). This ensures the proper identification of the section in the article metadata, and the consistent spelling of the heading.