5 DISCUSSION Our goal was to investigate the effects of system explanations on the UX in an autonomous driving scenario. In order to do so, two experimental groups, one being provided with live explanations during the driving scenario and one having no explanations, were compared. Both groups, however, were able to interact with a mobile app that summarised the drive and explained the autonomous shuttle manoeuvres afterwards. As we expected, the UX is affected by the explanations that were provided during and after the drive. Group A, who had no live explanations, rated the UX significantly lower than group B with live explanations. Additionally, the mobile application afterwards was evaluated differently. While passengers with no live explanations seem to benefit from the mobile application after the drive, passengers who were not provided with live explanations do not. This finding, while preliminary, suggests that live explanations are sufficient to neutralise the possible negative effects autonomous driving has on the UX. The UEQ-S showed that the explanations helped to neutralise the negative effects on the HQ while it was possible to reach a positive PQ.

Our hypothesis regarding increased feeling of safety and the attitude towards using technology are not supported by the data. These results may be explained by the experimental setup of the study. As the experiment took place in a non-moving AV simulator, participants were continuously aware that they were not actually driven through real traffic by an autonomous system. A real driving scenario was only simulated. This may have influenced participants during their questionnaires and interview, particularly their estimation of feeling safe. This could explain the lack of significant results for hypothesis H1.1. This explanation is supported by the fact that the rating for perceived safety was high among all groups and conditions and is backed by the qualitative results of the post-drive interviews. Regardless of the experimental group, a noteworthy number of people stated they have felt well during the drive. These comments might also reflect on insignificant results of the AVAM’s perceived safety variable in Table 2. However, the large number of statements is also a result of the interview, where participants were asked if they felt unwell or if anything was unclear. 

Hypothesis H1.3 about increased interest in using the vehicle was also not supported by the data. The UEQ-S revealed that the dimension boring-interesting had the highest negative effect on the HQ among all groups and conditions. This might partly be explained by the fact that the driving scenario was only simulated and the driving was considered careful and slow by a large number of people. The results, however, implicate that creating an interesting experience for the user should be kept in focus when aiming for a positive UX. This might be achieved in a more tailored way of communicating with the passenger to ensure that only information of interest is provided. Therefore, a natural progression of this work is to analyse the effect of the user’s preference as well as the impact of individual differences to allow for a more personalised communication. Additionally, ways of actively interacting with the AV or choosing and changing the communication and transparency settings might be helpful to avoid unnecessary explanations. This might be especially important in the long run, expecting the need for explanations to change when interacting with a system repeatedly. Since the focus of this study was on first-time users, more work will need to be done to determine the long-term effects of transparency on UX.

Regarding the feeling of control, the mobile application made a significant difference. This was true for both groups, i.e., the mobile application was beneficial even for passengers with live explanations. This is especially relevant since the subjective feeling of control was found to correlate positively with almost any dimension of the UEQ-S. This relationship should be evaluated further in future research.

The qualitative post-drive interviews largely support these results. Participants who had live explanations predominantly evaluated the communication as clear and comprehensive, whereas participants without live explanations stated more unclear situations and negative descriptions of the AV such as being boring and slow. The mobile application was described as unnecessary much more frequently by participants who were provided with live explanations. The evaluation of the app, however, might be influenced by the overall high feeling of safety during the ride. It is quite possible that more complex or more critical situations during the ride may increase the need to get in-depth explanations after the driving situation. This might be especially true in the case of a real driving scenario instead of a simulated one.