3 EXPERIMENTAL SETUP 3.1 Prototype We conducted the study in a static (non-moving) driving simulator that was equipped with four car seats (two in the front, two in the back), one frontal display, two lateral displays on each side, and lateral LED strip lights on the sides of the display and above the lateral sides. The simulation is intended to represent the concept of an autonomous (shared) shuttle. Participants entered the simulator from the side and took a seat within the enclosed driving space, see Figure 1. We constructed the shuttle as its own room to simulate a van-sized shuttle experience

A pre-recorded driving scenario was displayed to the participants on all screens. We recorded the driving scene with three GoPro Hero 5 cameras (front, left, right), and added AR-simulated visualisations manually with Adobe After Efects and motion tracking. We assigned testers to two groups: Group A watched the original version of the scene recording. Group B watched the scene that was enhanced by simultaneous explanatory information (live explanation): (1) overlay visualisations on the screen simulating augmented reality (2) textual information on the screen regarding velocity, speed limits, destination and time to reach the destination (3) lighting on the LED strip lights in diferent colours and the option to blink These enhancements for individual driving situations and their added information to the scene are described in Table 1. After the ride, we provided both groups with information about the ride via a mobile application, which allowed for comparing the efect of live explanations versus delayed explanations on the UX. For participants who had no live explanations, the mobile application was the only source of information on the ride and therefore the only way to better understand the shuttle’s behaviour (see Figure 3). The option to have a mobile application as a source of additional information after the ride might be especially helpful for frst-time users or users, who were confused by the shuttle’s behaviour and were not provided with live explanations.

The live explanations were only shown on the front display. The lateral displays showed slightly blurred scene recordings to avoid distraction and foster a focus on the front display. The shuttle prototype did not provide any audio or car sounds, as the original audio file of the video recording had low quality due to wind noises.

3.2 Participant Groups Overall, 40 participants were individually taking part in the experiment, 20 participants in each of the following groups: Group A : During the drive, participants get no live explanations. After the drive, participants are asked to interact with the drive summary on a mobile app. Group B : During the drive, participants get live explanations. After the drive, participants are asked to interact with the drive summary on a mobile app. The gender distribution of participants was 35% female and 65% male (group A: 10 female, 10 male; group B: 4 female, 16 male). Their average age was 24.65 (SD=4.97). The group-specific age distribution for group A was 24.6 (SD=4.51) and for group B 26.1 (SD=5.43). The majority of participants primarily travels by public transport with 55%, 37.5% travel by car, 5% by bicycle, and 2.5% by foot. Based on their prior experiences with autonomous systems, participants are distributed in: 25% had no prior experiences, 50% had experiences with driving assistance such as cruise control, 12.5% had experiences with semi-automatic driving systems such as lane assists, 5% had experiences with highly automated driving systems such as highway and take-over driving assistants, and 7.5% had experiences with fully autonomous vehicles in research contexts. The participant group consisted of employees of a German automobile manufacturer,students and employees of a university as well as employees of a research campus. Each participant received a 10 Euro Amazon voucher for their participation.

3.3 Explanations of Driving Situations in Shuttle Simulator and Mobile Application For each participant, the experiment lasted 30 minutes on average. As part of the experiment, the overall driving time in the shuttle prototype was 8 minutes 25 seconds which is equivalent to an average taxi ride in Germany [3]. The recorded driving situation took place in an urban downtown area during the daytime. The maximum speed during the recording was 50 km/h, which was also the inner-city speed limit. The average velocity during the ride was 15 km/h, caused by the trafc fow, trafc lights, and obstacles.

During this driving time, eight driving situations were displayed that happened unexpectedly and caused the simulated vehicle to slow down and update its driving behaviour with regard to the trafc situation. The eight situations are listed in Table 1 together with the live explanations for group B.

We introduced participants to the experiment with the information that they are going to fill in questionnaires, take part in an autonomous driving experiment, and interact with a mobile app. Participants did not receive any additional tasks, e.g., about reaching their destination in a given time, to reduce potential stress and to let participants focus on the ride itself. As participants regularly take part in public traffic situations, they were naturally able to judge the reaction of the vehicle during their ride, e.g., they were able to evaluate the vehicle’s performance. During the ride, participants did not perform any other activities. 

An example of driving scenario number 1 is shown in Figure 2. Only the participants of group B received live explanations in multiple ways. The LED lights were turned on and changed in colour. The front display highlighted the intended route by a blue transparent marking on the street. Detected objectsin the street and their status were also marked on the display if they were relevant for the driving situation. The shuttle destination, the current road name, and the shuttle velocity were displayed on the bottom of the front display

3.4 Experiment Design Figure 4 shows the overall experimental sequence: (1) We introduced participants to the experiment and asked questions on demographic aspects, prior knowledge about AVs and their typical mobility behaviour. (2) Participants then entered the shuttle simulator and experienced the autonomous ride. Only participants of group B experienced the driving situations (Table 1) together with the live explanations. (3) After participants exited the shuttle simulator, they filled in the AVAM, UEQ-S, and one additional item regarding their subjective feeling of control, i.e., participants were asked to rate the statement “During the ride, I had the feeling to stay in control.” on a 7-point Likert-scale. This item was added, as the AVAM only refers to the user’s control over body parts, which is less relevant for our fully autonomous context. According to Ajzen and Icek [2], the subjective feeling of control can be understood as a person’s belief to be capable of obtaining a desired outcome and achieving a given goal. Therefore, a user should be able to experience a feeling of control even though they do not have actual control over the vehicles’s behaviour during the ride or after using the mobile application. After the questionnaires, we also asked participants if they were feeling well or if anything was unclear and what else they would like to express about the ride. Since we focused on first-time users, there was no pre-drive evaluation of the participants UX. Instead, we emphasised a comparison between the evaluation directly after the ride and after the interaction with the mobile application. (4) We then asked participants to interact with the app. It shows the (simulated) driven route and provides additional information about each driving scenario. Participants were asked to look at their ride again, and the different situations from Table 1. The location together with visual and textual information, which was already shown to group B on the frontal screen during the ride, was presented in the app. (5) Finally, participants filled in the AVAM, UEQ-S, including the adjusted control item and they were able to express their thoughts on the mobile app

We chose a mixed-method within-subjects design since we studied whether the UX difers for live feedback during the ride and an app usage after the ride (retrospective feedback and its implications). Therefore, we did not let participants experience the ride twice (with and without live explanations) since this would have created a bias. This would have also undermined the purpose of the mobile application and therefore, not allowed us to fnd out if it is a useful method. For these reasons, we chose an independent control group without live explanations but retrospective explanations.

We chose the situations above to reflect driving situations that require an update of the planned ride as a reaction to the environment. Furthermore, they took place in an urban area to take the possibility of trust issues and fear of automation failures into account as described in [17]. The situations typically caused the shuttle to slow down or drive slowly. These situations reflect that the autonomous drive always prioritises safety. We expect this behaviour to cause impatience or confusion among the passengers, which is expected to lead to a decrease in their UX.

3.5 Hypotheses The assumed hypotheses for the experimental setup are: H1.1 Hypothesis1.1 – Increased Perceived Feeling of Safety. The vehicle often drives slowly to demonstrate a careful and safety oriented driving behaviour. This is expected to increase a feeling of safety during the autonomous ride for passengers, and thus an increase in user experience. In this case, significant differences in AVAM question items ‘24. I believe that using the vehicle would be dangerous’, ‘25. I would feel safe while using the vehicle’, ‘26. I would trust the vehicle’ are expected between group A and B during the ride, as group B receives live explanations about the vehicle behaviour, and between group A during the ride and during the app usage, as the app provides additional information about the vehicle behaviour.

H1.2 Hypothesis1.2 – Increased Understanding and Ease of Use. Providing passengers with live explanations or with information after the ride about the AV’s actions will increase their understanding and ease of use of the shuttle. Significant differences are expected in AVAM question items ‘4. I would fnd the vehicle easy to use’, ‘5. My interaction with the vehicle would be clear and understandable’, ‘6. It would be easy for me to use the vehicle’ between group A and B as well as within group A during and after the ride while interacting with the app.

H1.3 Hypothesis1.3 – Increased Interest. Live explanations about the AV’s actions will make the autonomous ride more interesting for passengers. Significant differences are expected in AVAM question items ‘14. The vehicle would make driving more interesting’, ’15. Using the vehicle would be fun’.

H2 Hypothesis2 – Increased User Experience. Providing passengers with live explanations during the ride or after the ride via a mobile app about the AV’s actions will increase their UX of the ride. Significant differences are expected in UEQ-S results for pragmatic quality (PQ) and hedonic quality (HQ)

H3 Hypothesis3 – Increased Perceived Feeling of Control. Providing passengers with explanations during or after the ride will increase their perceived feeling of control. Participants were presented with a 7-point Likert scaled question item ‘During the ride, I had the feeling to stay in control’ and expect significant differences.