6 LIMITATIONS As the experiment was conducted in a non-moving AV simulator, participants were continuously aware that they were not actually driving through real traffic by an autonomous vehicle. This may have influenced participants during their questionnaires and interview, particularly their estimation of feeling safe. This might explain the lack of significant results for hypothesis H1.1. Recent studies estimate that more than 50% of asked consumers regard autonomous driving as being safe [7], which is in contrast to the rather high numbers (above 5 across all test groups) for perceived safety shown in Table 2. Another aspect that has to be taken into account are the rather young participants with 25 years on average, which might be a reason for their positive attitude towards AVs. Furthermore, the low age average does not represent a wider population, and thus, we did not analyse age-specific effects.

The simulator did also lack some aspects to support an immersive experience: no driving noise was available during the experiment, no visual depth was provided by the displays, and the display visualisations only simulated augmented reality. Also, as the visual enhancements on the displays were done manually, the intended route and marked items were perfectly highlighted without errors. In reality, visualisations would probably be less perfect

With regard to the experimental task, participants were only “attending” the driving situation. They did not intend to travel from one location to another. If and how fast they reached the destination was of less importance to them, and they were also not instructed to pay attention to reaching the destination. As we focus on first-time users or users with little experience in autonomous driving, this is not a long-term study and participants were using the shuttle simulator only once during the experiment. When using the shuttle several times, however, the UX and interaction will most likely change while users become more familiar with the system.

Methodologically, the hypotheses could mostly be determined by the AVAM questionnaire variables. The additional hypothesis about a feeling of control, however, is not part of the AVAM and participants were only asked to answer one item. In future experiments, we will extend items regarding control to evaluate if its significance prevails.

