COLORING BETWEEN THE DOTS Having explored various theoretical frames for why anticipatory ethnography is a theoretically viable practice, here we explore some practical ways of enacting the theory. At this stage we cannot make an incisive argument for the ‘best’ way of conducting anticipatory ethnographies. Empirical work is certainly needed to address questions such as at what stage of design processes should anticipatory ethnography take place, and how to configure the idea for different design contexts? Rather than suggest we ‘know’ how to proceed we’ve tried to paint a picture of a fertile landscape that is ripe for development and here we present examples to clarify the potential of that landscape, beginning to make it tangible. These ‘modes’ of doing anticipatory ethnography may be used as blueprints for further exploration and as seed ideas for those looking to expand upon or test the concept.

Examples of Anticipatory Ethnography in Action We suggest looking at design fiction prototypes as a painting (in harmony with our ‘joining the dots’ metaphor). There are three parts to this metaphorical painting, corresponding to three approaches to anticipatory ethnography: • Studying the process of creating a design fiction (ethnography of the paint, brushes, and making of a painting). • Studying how an audience interacts with or perceives a design fiction (ethnography of people viewing the painting). • Studying the content of a design fiction (ethnography of the painting itself). We have equated the 2013 film “Her” directed by Spike Jonze, to a design fiction for the sake of our examples. A Hollywood movie, sitting within the sci-fi, drama and romance genres, Her also exhibits properties that qualify it as a design fiction: emphasis on the future and an affecting diegesis together give the film the potential to suspend disbelief. We acknowledge that the amount of resources dedicated to making Her (a budget in excess of $20m, for instance) are not readily available to the majority of design projects, however this doesn’t preclude the film from being an efficient vehicle to articulate how anticipatory ethnography may be enacted. 

Studying the Process of Creating a Design Fiction In terms of our metaphor we describe this mode as doing an ‘ethnography of the paint, brushes, and making of the painting’. In practical terms we suggest employing elements of design ethnography’s toolkit and applying them to a study of the creative team behind design fiction productions. Writers, directors and actors can become very close to projects. Can this proximity allow them to become ‘situated in the diegesis’?

Spike Jonze purportedly realized while producing the film that “[Her] isn’t a movie about technology. It’s a movie about people” (Vanhemert, 2014), hinting at Jonze’s ‘interior’ relationship with the diegesis of the film. In another interview about the film Jonze says “When something felt weird, when Joaquin was uncomfortable with something, I knew it meant there was some place I had cheated or hadn’t thought through or hadn’t gone deep enough. His flinch is always worth listening to.” (Harris, 2013). The second observation indicates that the actor (Joaquin) was so ‘situated’ within the diegesis that the director used the actor’s insight to sense-check his production decisions. Together these sentiments suggest that the process of making a design fiction may be a suitable site for anticipatory ethnography

Studying How an Audience Interacts With or Perceives a Design Fiction In this mode of anticipatory ethnography we suggest employing the concepts of audience ethnography (La Pastina, 2005) or in terms of our metaphor ‘an ethnography of the people viewing the painting’. Two possible approaches are by using the ‘afterglow’ 10 or through more structured techniques such as diary studies, generating scenarios, task-focused scenarios or accompanied viewing with audience members (Quirk et al., 2009).

We want to highlight that the audience can be considered situated via proxy, within the story world of a design fiction. This supposition pivots around the strength of the diegesis; it must be believable and relatable to the individual realities of the audience. Referring back to Her, the production team went to considerable lengths to make the fictional future depicted in the film appear familiar, even mundane. The team strived to make the technological parts of the film’s diegesis easy to follow and not intrusive. In the words of the production designer this served to “undesign the design” (Vanhemert, 2014), or said differently to allow an effortless suspension of disbelief. This ‘undesign’, if done well, situates the audience vicariously within the world of the film. Assuming the audience is situated in this way, we can infer that they also harbor the knowledge necessary to glean ethnographic insights from them. 

Studying the content of a design fiction This final mode of anticipatory ethnography we believe to be the most attractive both theoretically and practically speaking. In terms of our metaphorical view of anticipatory ethnography this can be considered an ‘ethnography of the painting itself’. Where our first two modes require working with either the production team behind a design fiction film or the audience interacting with a design fiction film, in this approach the ethnographer directly engages with the artifact. This mode could be conducted on any design fiction artifact, whether the researcher was involved with its production or not

Very simply put the idea is to immerse oneself in a design fiction with a design ethnography ‘hat’ on and gathering field notes that pertain to the content of the film. This hinges on the ability of the diegesis to conjure the effect of situatedness by in order for this mode to work properly. However in contrast to the other modes, allowing the ethnographer to directly engage with the diegesis makes the proposition less challenging

Film reviews of Her exemplify the richness of the film’s story and appear to contain insights that we frame as being ‘sub-ethnographic’. For instance, in his analysis Scott Myers “goes into the movie” (2014) and provides a glimpse of his raw observations that bear an uncanny resemblance to an ethnographer’s notes. Jason Farago has gone beyond raw observation and towards insights, “You can ask, too, about the value of Theodore’s love for Samantha… not only as legitimate but as morally improving” (2013). In this mode the ethnographer becomes immersed in the design fiction such that they are ‘diegetically situated’ and the methods of design ethnography become immediately relevant.

Reflections on the Finished Painting These examples allow us to reveal how the theoretical relationship between design ethnography and design fiction introduced in our ‘joining the dots’ section can be brought out of theory toward practical applications, thus we hope to build confidence in the proposition. The crosscutting principles of these examples is how design ethnography’s reliance on rich context (Geertz, 1994) is comparable to design fiction’s reliance on diegesis. It follows that anticipatory ethnography, therefore, relies on diegesis. Beyond reliance it is also true that a design fiction can only really be considered a suitable site for anticipatory ethnography if its diegesis is a truly affecting one.

Our objective in framing anticipatory ethnography in this way (to define our terms of reference, then to explain how the ‘dots’ can be joined, and finally how to color the space between these dots) is to leave the reader inspired by the concept alone, but also to provide some clarity around how it may be done in practice. 