Design is a success story. Since the industrial revolution, design’s influence has spread far and wide into every corner of the world. It is also the success of design as a worldshaping practice that has helped to produce a progressively complex set of problems. Increasingly design and designers are tasked with creating solutions to address the ‘wicked’1 implications of the designed world we now inhabit.

All design looks to shape the future, designers have a suite of tools available to help them do this. In this paper we focus on two such tools: design ethnography and design fiction. In the first part of the paper we review our terms of reference: we describe how ethnography has been reconfigured under the banner of design ethnography. Next, we discuss how the practice of design fiction has emerged in recent years, as part of the speculative design movement. In the latter sections of the paper we explain why and how design ethnography and design fiction can work together for mutual benefit. Ultimately we name a new practice: anticipatory ethnography.

Through defining our terms of reference we aim to expose the key strengths and weaknesses of each practice. We highlight how design ethnography has helped designers understand “use before use” (Redström, 2008 p. 421) therefore abetting design’s prospective nature. For design fiction the core strength we focus on is how it derives value from creating fictional worlds. However we also highlight problems within each practice. We argue that design fiction is immature and in need of rigorous methods to facilitate its application in real-world settings and that design ethnography will always have a limited temporal scope so long as it relies on traditional notions of “situated” (Suchman, 1987) observations. We believe design ethnography and design fiction can be configured to work together so that the problems of one are solved by the strengths of the other, and vice versa.

This paper describes, in scholarly terms, how the practice of anticipatory ethnography can be imagined in theory. If we consider the three ways that design and research crossover described by Frayling (1993 p. 5) then this paper should be considered as “research into design”. However we believe that the value of this work, for both design and ethnography communities, lies in exploring anticipatory ethnography’s use and usefulness in terms of Frayling’s “research though design” and “research for design”. In our view there is a need to explore practical applications of the theory, so in the final part of the paper we use examples to describe how anticipatory ethnography could be operationalized in a number of different ways. 