JOINING THE DOTS So far we have introduced the constructs that are necessary in order to theoretically build the practice we’re calling anticipatory ethnography. In this section we will explicitly describe how the relevant properties of the two constructs (properties that we refer to as ‘dots’) may be joined together (as with ‘join the dots’ picture books) thus allowing the full ‘outline’ of anticipatory ethnography to emerge. Our dots come under three headings, explained below.

Temporal Constraint We have posited that all design processes attempt to move from existing situations to preferred situations. Design fictions are interested in the preferable too, but by virtue of the diegetic prototype are temporally disinhibited when compared to traditional design. This quality is one pillar supporting our vision of anticipatory ethnography. 

Design ethnography’s primary goal is to explore the present with a view to producing actionable insights that will inform the near future. Although not a clear-cut debate, our position is that the further into the future insights derived ethnographically try to look, the weaker the ‘signals from the present’ will be. In other words if a design team attempts to understand the ‘preferability’ of futures based upon observations of now, there is a limit as to how far design ethnography can look: design ethnography is temporally constrained. 

Our contention is that these two facets of each practice can be configured to work together. So if we accept that design ethnography is temporally constrained, and then align that position with the understanding that design fiction is not, then it would appear logical to assume that design fiction may well be a viable means of temporally unbinding design ethnography. Conversely, if such a formulation were possible it would simultaneously serve design fiction’s need for firmer methods and modes of analysis.

Suspending Disbelief Design fiction uses diegesis, in the words of Bruce Sterling, to “suspend disbelief in the future”. The implication of this phrase is that the diegesis of any particular design fiction should describe the future in believable terms i.e., in terms that are suitably mundane as to allow the audience to become ‘situated’ in the diegetic reality of the design fiction. In this way, diegesis serves to ‘situate via proxy.’

The related design ethnography dot is contained within the concept of situatedness. The way in which we interpret and understand the world isn’t just about activity, it isn’t just about context, but it is an amalgam built from both together (Clancey, 1993). As applied to design problems this can be seen as ethnographic insights becoming more believable when backed up by context. This allows insights to become ‘mutually intelligible’ to both ethnographers and designers, thus suspending the disbelief of the design team.

We posit that the use of diegesis and situated observations both add value by providing a means to suspend disbelief. The difference is that design fiction does it in the future based upon fictional scenarios, whereas design ethnography does so based upon observations of the present. Although there is this temporal contrast, in most other ways we believe the concepts are interchangeable.

It would be fair to say that design ethnography’s relationship with situatedness, is in effect, the act of studying the ‘diegesis of reality’. In other words a conflation of context, process, and action that come together to form a believable story. We therefore believe that both design fiction and design ethnography derive their value in the same way. 

Insightful Dialogue with the Future We argue that the insights produced by design ethnographies are in isolation not immediately useful entities. Instead, it’s through a dialogue about these insights that true meaning emerges, which can then be ‘actioned’ by designers. Because design ethnography is a relatively established field, it has developed methods to not only use situated observations to produce actionable insights, but also to facilitate interactions between designers and researchers about those insights. These interactions exist within a ‘discursive space’ from within which a meaningful dialogue about a near future can be had. The nature of this discursive space is akin to the properties of design fiction artifacts. 

To reiterate our position on speculative design and design fiction: these practices do not endeavor to didactically indicate singular visions of the future, but rather to forge an environment conducive to conversations. These conversations are intentionally questioning and ultimately want to arrive at new questions which in their own right will help to understand where preferable outcomes sit on a spectrum of probable, plausible, or possible futures. So as with design ethnography the underlying value of design fiction is the insightful dialogue about the future, and that dialogue is an emergent property of the discursive space.

In Summary It is by defining this parity between these various properties of design fiction and design ethnography that we believe creates the theoretical space to intellectually envision anticipatory ethnography.