Our proposition is a conflation of design ethnography and design fiction, so it is important to clearly define these practices before attempting to join them together. Through defining the practices, points of connectivity will become visible.

Design Design is a process as opposed to a fixed point, a process that is inherently concerned with looking to the future. The act of designing draws together insight from our contextual environment with our knowledge of what has passed. In doing so it reconciles past understandings with present conditions in order to mediate between now and the future. Design transmutes ideas, as they exist in a plurality of possible futures, into specific tangibles that exist in the present. As Simon puts it, “Everyone designs who devises courses of action aimed at changing existing situations into preferred ones” (Simon, 1969 p. 111). Core to our thesis is an appreciation of design’s need to operate within the liminal space between ‘existing situations’ and ‘preferred situations’.

Across the many different facets of the design discipline there are many different approaches, each with particular properties, strengths and weaknesses. These approaches are suited to the context in which they operate. Across this spread of approaches there is an equally diverse menagerie of tools employed by designers to understand and bridge the gap between what exists and what is preferable. Design fiction and design ethnography are two of the tools readily available to designers, each with their own quirks and nuances.

Design Ethnography Born in the anthropological household, ethnographic practice has been shaped by its engagement with the design family. Since ethnography’s inception, as seen in Malinowski’s work, the practice has come to be associated with research activities where the intent is to provide a comprehensive and rich account of everyday life and practices, often with the intent of uncovering actionable insights (Segelström and Holmlid, 2012).

However, ethnography’s initial encounter with design was marred by “angst”, documented in Salvador et al.’s commentary. The observation that, “people who could most benefit from our work in a corporate setting are also the most likely to question its relevance” (Salvador et al., 1999 p. 35-36) hints at the nature of this angst. The authors built a strong case for using ethnographic insights to aid design processes. The use of ethnographic practices in design has come to be known as design ethnography. According to van Dijk, design ethnography is firmly rooted in the design process itself, or “ethnographic qualitative research set within a design context” (2010 p. 1). 

Design ethnography needs to operate over shorter timescales than ethnography in social science research, as a result of the rapidity of design life cycles and commercial pressures. To this end it is a ‘reconfiguration’ of ethnography appropriate for design processes (Crabtree et al., 2012). Ethnography has demonstrated malleability and ductility in response to the hammering it received from the stress of industry and through the demanding relationship with design, and design ethnography continues to evolve, appropriating tools and techniques, adapting them for specific contexts (van Dijk, 2010). 

Design ethnography and ‘the future’ – Design ethnography emphasizes the future (Aiken, 2012) and helps in designing ‘use before use’. As a future-shaping endeavor, design per se frequently looks to design ethnography for assistance (Kelley, 2007, Crabtree et al., 2012, Forlano, 2013). Design ethnography though is not without criticism in this area. Dekker et al (2003) quoted by Crabtree et al (2012 p. 170) highlight the temporal limitations of ethnography, “The charge reads that design is all about the future... yet ethnography only focuses on how things are ‘here and now’ and in turn ‘privileges the status quo’”. Design ethnography’s ability to transform situated observation into understanding of the near future, while also being hamstrung by its reliance on the present, is key to our formulation of anticipatory ethnography.

The nature of ‘situatedness’ – Design ethnography derives insights by observing ‘situated’ (Suchman, 1987) phenomena as they occur in the present (Segelström et al., 2009). Anderson points out that ethnography’s “emphasis on importance of context for social action” is key (1997 p. 10). This thinking acknowledges the difference between our intentions, actions, and how we renegotiate, interrupt and disrupt plans through our mundane interactions and practices. Context is always a “major part of the study” (Parthasarathy, 2008), so ethnographers are always interested in “situatedness’’ (Rohlfing et al., 2003). “Situated activity is not a kind of action… not merely a claim that context is important, but what constitutes the context... To be perceiving the world is to be acting in it… so that what I am perceiving and how I am moving co-determine each other”.

However, designers can find it difficult to use ethnographically informed “situated action models” to provide design-related conclusions (Nardi, 1996). To address this issue, designers have relied on ethnomethodological variants of ethnography in order to translate insights from situated activities into actionable design insights (Randall et al., 2001, White et al., 2004, Crabtree et al., 2012). Ethnomethodologically informed ethnography warrants legitimacy to the phenomena being observed such “that the description of the situated organization of that activity in its detail makes that real worldly activity mutually intelligible.” (White et al., 2004 p. 114). Practically speaking, this lends a layer of believability to the insights that inform design choices because it draws on observations of mundane interaction. It factors in the emotional and practical dimensions of everyday activity, in doing so ethnomethodological approaches help to suspend designers’ suspicions. 

Design ethnography’s ability to produce actionable insights, and the role those insights play in design processes, is of direct relevance to anticipatory ethnography. We contend that design ethnography produces insights that help designers understand the future, however it follows that those insights can only be applicable to relatively near futures so long as they’re derived from observations of the present. The tie to the present is a function of design ethnography’s inseparable relationship with situated observations.

Design Fiction Although all design flirts with the future, a group of design practices that we collectively refer to as ‘speculative design’ have a more explicit relationship with the future and are the product of a wider ‘speculative turn’ in the design world. 5 The various approaches united under the banner of speculative design include critical design, futurescaping, design futures and design fiction (Raford, 2012). Traditional design practices reflect Simon’s (Simon, 1969) vision of design as a tool for getting from existing to preferred situations through incremental steps “up and to the right” (Bleecker, 2009). This traditional model of design invariably arrives at a singular ‘preferable’ outcome. Speculative design is distinct in that it strives to open up a discursive space that is underwritten by the unavoidable plurality of the future. As Dunne & Raby put it “the idea is not to show how things will be but to open up a space for discussion” (2013 p. 51). 

Where Carlson’s (2006) model sees design as a process constructed by both idea, and a resultant artifact, speculative design approaches are almost entirely focused on the idea, the plurality of the idea, and the associated connotations of that thinking. This is not to say that speculative design doesn’t involve the making of things, as it does, however these artifacts are considered as provocations or stimuli rather than preferable outcomes in their own right.

The particular speculative design approach we’re interested with is design fiction. Design fiction looks to achieve the goals of speculative design by designing with fiction. To be clear, the use of the word fiction does not refer to designs that are ‘made up’ or unreal (although they may be). Rather, design fiction refers to designing with stories, or within the world of a story. Creating a believable and relatable story world allows design fictions to first represent and then explore the nuances and ‘mundanity’ of future circumstances. A healthy design fiction ‘situates’ the viewer in a prospective future so they can envision it in a meaningful way.

The ‘diegetic prototype’ – Futurologist Bruce Sterling defines design fiction as “the intentional use of diegetic prototypes to suspend disbelief in the future” in an interview with slate.com6. We will unpack this definition in order to highlight what design fiction is and what its specific value proposition is.

First of all, let’s consider prototyping. Prototyping is a key part of many design processes, often employed by designers as an ‘internal stimulus’ to a project. It is an incredibly powerful tool, allowing designers and design teams to understand how the product of their divergent, creative, or “designerly” ways of knowing (Cross, 2008) might manifest themselves in a finished product. Tom Kelley calls prototyping the “shorthand of design” (2001) allowing designers to ‘play’ with ideas before committing to one. If we refer back to our vision of design as an inherently forward-looking process, then one of the roles that the physical prototypes play is to allow us to go beyond mental models of the future. By prototyping, in the traditional sense, we can touch, feel, and interact with possible futures. In many ways prototypes allow designers to have ‘situated’ interactions with concepts.

But what is a diegetic prototype? As alluded to above, the fiction element of design fiction refers to stories, it is from this foundation in stories that the term diegesis comes into play. Diegesis is the ‘world of the story’. Any story’s diegesis is constructed from anything that exists within that particular story world. So, if the characters in the story can hear it, touch it, or see it, then it is likely to be diegetic. For example the orchestral scores added over the top of dramatic battle scenes in Saving Private Ryan are non-diegetic because the characters cannot hear the music. However, the men on the beaches, the crashing waves, the sounds of the guns; these are all diegetic. Anything that is diegetic may be considered ‘real’ in terms of the world of the story and everything that is diegetic is contextually consistent with every other element of that diegesis.

The concept of the ‘diegetic prototype’ then, is anything that is being prototyped within the diegesis of a story. Leveraging the value of prototyping, but doing so in a fictional world, diegetic prototypes don’t need to exist in reality and must only be consistent with their own diegesis. As such virtually all design constraints are removed. One such constraint that is negated by using diegetic prototypes is that of time, hence why design fiction is particularly compelling for speculative design. Diegetic prototypes can transcend the time horizon of the present and begin to address McLuhan and Fiore’s contention that we “attach ourselves to objects, to the flavor of the most recent past. We look at the present in the rear view mirror” (1967 p. 74-75). Using diegetic prototypes, packaged inside design fiction artifacts, we arrive at a compelling approach to design practice, free from temporal constraints. 

Design fictions are usually manifested as films, which is not surprising when you trace the roots of diegetic prototyping and design fiction back to sci-fi film and television (Kirby, 2010). However, increasingly design fictions are moving beyond the medium of film.8 Nonfilmic approaches may well enrich design fiction’s potential relevance to anticipatory ethnography, however that discussion is beyond the scope of this paper, and for the sake of simplicity we will continue with the assumption that these diegeses are the story worlds created inside film-based design fiction artifacts. 

The diegetic prototype is not a new thing; traces of diegetic prototypes exist within DaVinci’s inventions, in works of fiction from Jules Verne’s The Time Machine to E.M Forster’s The Machine Stop, right through to comic books like Stan Lee’s X-men and television series’ such as Star Trek. In almost any science fiction work some form of diegetic prototype exists. However it has taken the huge acceleration of change resultant from times of modernity to actually show us the persuasive character of diegetic prototypes to predict, and arguably shape, new sociotechnical directions. This process, at first delivered through science fiction novels, series and films is beginning to happen before our eyes, powered by the networked information age that we live in (Lanier, 2014). 

Noting this fascinating phenomenon, David Kirby posited the value of using diegetic prototypes as a way of understanding and generating insights from fiction that can be applied directly to science: “Movies have provided many film-makers and scientists with the opportunity to create diegetic prototypes establishing the necessity, viability and minimization of risk associated with space travel” (2010 p. 65). Embracing Kirby’s idea, the design fiction movement has taken it upon itself to do precisely that. Returning to Sterling’s definition of design fiction, a central point is that designers are now using diegetic prototypes intentionally. Whereas in examples from literature, film and comics, diegetic prototyping occurs as a byproduct of the storytelling and entertainment endeavor, designers and practitioners of design fiction now are mobilizing diegetic prototypes intentionally for the purposes of informing design processes and projects.

Although the phenomenon that is diegetic prototyping has many exemplars in science fiction, which appear to demonstrate its value, simply applying it to design problems is not straightforward. Julian Bleecker recently commented, almost exactly four years after his influential essay on the subject, that “I don’t think we’ve figured it out” and “studying it, understanding it and trying to devise some of the principles - of what we’re calling design fiction - is what we’re trying to do” (2013). This raises the question, if design fiction is a tool to explore the future then it is a means, but to what end? Design fiction needs theories and methods from which designers can operationalize the powerful phenomenon of diegetic prototyping so the resulting insights can become part of real world design challenges. This paper paves the way for one such method. 