Issued in 2009 by an anonymous entity (Rogojnu and Badea, 2014), Bitcoin technology has become a leader in peer-to-peer crypto-currency (P2P foundation, 2015). It uses nodes of a peer-to-peer network with the purpose of keeping track of transactions, and cryptographic algorithms to provide core security functions (Bitcoin Wiki, 2011). In the Bitcoin network, money is not printed, but mined, through widely distributed computing power (Bradbury, 2013). Miners create Bitcoin in a controlled way by running dedicated programs. According to Kervick (2014), Bitcoin architecture differs significantly from prior electronic payment systems, and potentially lacks trust. Bitcoin technology operates through electronic transactions and poses interesting tensions regarding the issue of trust. On the one hand, its open source, decentralized architecture is open for scrutiny. On the other hand, Bitcoin operates under the premise of anonymity: although the transactions under each individual Bitcoin add ess are publicly archived, the identity of the owner of the address remains undisclosed. Transactions are considered anonymous because nothing ties individuals or organizations to the accounts that enable online transactions.

While most of the academic work on trust in Bitcoin technology has taken place in cybersecurity and cryptography areas, a user-centered approach to the exploration of Bitcoin has been limited. We argue that a richer understanding of the issue of trust informed by Bitcoin users is important. This paper offers a review of relevant work on money and trust in HCI, and critically examines its value in understanding the issues of trust in Bitcoin technology. The main contribution of this paper is the development of research framework to explore the specific trust challenges raised by the Bitcoin technology. The following section offers a review of the main models of trust. Then we introduce our research framework, and apply it to identify the challenges around trust in Bitcoin technology. 

Trust and Digital Currency in HCI While trust has been a research area benefiting from longterm HCI interest, the issue of digital currency has just starting to capture scholars’ attention. In a CHI 2014 workshop focused on financial interactions and digital currency (Kaye, 2014), 12 position papers have focused on issues such as finance, commerce, financial literacy, money democracy, emotions and aesthetics. 

Ferreira et al. (2015) have explored user experience with Bristol Pound (£B), a local complementary currency used in Bristol, UK. Authors run a survey with about 200 users on how people conduct mobile phone transactions via SMS, their motivations and challenges for using this currency. Study findings highlighted the payment’s unpredictable and slow qualities and their value for strengthening social connections through ludic interactions, as well as increased mindfulness about their practice of purchase and consumption. This underlies the paradox of how a technology lacking trust, allows for strengthening the social trust between the actors involved in transactions, leading in turn to a more cohesive community. The study has also emphasized that Bitcoin technology may benefit from leveraging such face to face social connections in small communities to mitigate the challenges of slow, unreliable transactions. 

In a critique of alternative and complementary currency and exchange paradigms, Carroll and Bellotti (2015) have discussed four technological innovations: local currencies, timebanks, cryptocurrencies, and microenterprises. In particular, they have highlighted the value of cryptocurrency like Bitcoin for individual’s privacy and control potentially subverting centralized governmental and financial institutions. Authors have placed this critique in the current global economic context, whose challenges may well benefit from such novel, money centered design and technologies, as a rich space for CSCW and HCI communities to engage with.

With respect to trust, we start by introducing key models and properties. Trust has been described as the subjective belief in the character, ability, strength, reliability, honesty or truth of someone or something (Grandison and Sloman, 2000). In their seminal model of mechanisms of trust, Riegelsberger et al. (2005) described trust warranting properties using the distinction between contextual and intrinsic properties. Their contextual properties consist of temporal, social and institutional embeddedness which are more relevant in the first interaction, while the intrinsic properties of the trustee such as ability, norm-compliance and benevolence become increasingly relevant as trust matures through continual exchanges. The multifaceted concept of trust has been explored across a large range of interactive systems, and consistent findings have shown the distinction between technological, social, and institutional trust (Misiolek, 2002; Lippert and Swiecrz, 2005; Leppanen, 2010). 

Technological Trust The technological dimension of trust consists of individual perceptions and assessments of technologyrelated trust issues (Leppanen, 2010). The technological trust can be better understood in the light of its three attributes: advantage to use, expectation of technology usability, and perception of user’s skills. The advantage to use refers to the needs for implementing a technological system that will increase task performance (Goodhue et al. 2006). 

Expectation of technology usability has been defined by Davis (1986) in terms of user’s initial presumption on what using the technology will be like. Usability can also be seen as a set of objectives and guidelines for system designers and software developers to create devices and applications that take minimal effort for the users to use. For example, Nielsen (2000) proposed guidelines for enhancing individual trust in website by assessing usability in contrast to the risk of making online transactions. Perception of user skills capture individual’s perception of his or her capabilities and motivations to use a computer or a technological system (Nielsan, 2000). 

Social trust Social trust has been defined as the feeling of the good disposition of the other (Castelfranchi and Falcone, 2001). Leppanen (2010) also identified four key concepts of trust including disposition to trust, perceived trustworthiness, situational factors, and shared attributes which we further outline. Disposition to trust depicts the trustor’s own willingness to be dependent on others, further determined by a trusting stance and faith in humanity (McKnight et al., 1998). It has been argued that the disposition to this goodwill arises from positive trust concerning exchanges with people, which lead to a positive general belief on the mankind. Boon & Holmes (1991) also discuss how individual’s disposition towards trust sets the expectations for trustworthiness in general. Hence, personal, first-hand positive experience towards a new context is paramount in building up the disposition to trust. Perceived trustworthiness has been defined as the expectation that another party will perform a particular action (Mayer et al. 1995; Rousseau et al., 1998). This is an important concept which relies on distinct categories of beliefs such as benevolence, competence, honesty and predictability (McKnight et al., 1998). Situational factors are those targeting the context of the organization (McKnight et al., 1998). Moorman (1993) and Purser (2001) argued for the importance of the situation where trust formation takes place. Sharing attributes with the trusting partner is crucial in building trusted relationship (Hupcey et al., 2001). These include the importance of positive past exchanges that has been emphasized in Boon and Holmes’s model (1991) describing the continuous nature of the shared experience. According to this model, both short- and long-term exchanges can benefit from shared attributes of trust.

Institutional Trust Institutional trust is defined as the party being initially willingly vulnerable to the counterpart’s action (Mayer et al., 1995). It can be described through power relations, and organizational structure. Power relation becomes important for trustworthiness in social relationship where an individual has a position of power for decision making in an organization (Tyler and Degoey, 1996). Trust in organizational structure reflects the importance of hierarchical relationships across the organization (Kramer, 1996). In McKnight’s (1998) trust model, the organizational trust is explained through the system of rules and regulations governing each activity in the organization. There have also been attempts to conceptualize trust in decentralized systems. For example, Gutscher’s (2007) trust model integrates public key authenticity verification to evaluate arbitrary trust structures which allow multiple keys per user. It also enables the signer of trust certificate to limit the length of the trust chains and to define the semantic of trust. This trust model consists of four building blocks. Two basic blocks define the existing trust and authentication relations together with inference rules for combining them. The other two blocks describe representations of trust values and how to compute them for trust relations.

Blaze et al. (1996) address the issue of decentralized trust management through four principles such as unified mechanism, flexibility, locality of control, and separation of mechanism and policy. The unified mechanism holds the policies, credentials and relationships for network application security, while the complex trust relationship falls under the flexibility principle. Locality of control supports the trust of relationship across the community, while the separation of mechanism policy supports control of the verifying credentials of the applications.

The trust concepts, models and principles described above either fail to address trust in decentralization systems or address it from the sole perspective of users of such systems. Bitcoin is not only a decentralized system but a grassroots driven technology involving multiple stakeholders. Thus, it offers a unique perspective to explore the development of trust within and across these stakeholders, together with its most challenging and promising issues. A deep understanding of these trust issues in Bitcoin technology may in turn challenge some of the assumptions underlying our current models of trust. 