RESEARCH FRAMEWORK We now propose a research framework (Figure 1) which integrates key aspects of trust from HCI literature, with the main challenges posed by Bitcoin technology, to ensure the exploration of trust across all the Bitcoin stakeholders. The framework places Bitcoin technology at its center, and highlights how different stakeholders are involved in shaping the three different levels of trust. We define technological trust as people’s trust in Bitcoin technology experienced before, during, and after engaging in online transactions. This could include users’ trust that their Bitcoin account is secured and cannot be hacked, or payees’ trust that the transfer is authorized.

Social trust is the trust that Bitcoin stakeholders develop between each other. This trust is enlisted for each type of exchange occurring across (and within) different categories of stakeholders. For example transactions involving purchase of goods enlist trust between users and merchants. Upon completion, these transactions require miners’ authorization, so both users and merchants need to trust the miners for completing their job. At the same time, selfish miners can raise issues of trust among miners (Eyal and Sirer, 2014). Social trust between users/merchants and exchangers can be also problematic1 . We argue that because of its decentralized nature, the classic definition of institutional trust does not apply to Bitcoin. However, there is a higher authoring to which Bitcoin technology is requested to be accountable, namely governmental institutions. We define institutional trust, the trust of governmental institutions in Bitcoin technology. The main issues here relate to money laundry and deflation

Applying the Framework to Identify Trust Challenges We now explore how the framework can be applied to identify important trust issues which deserve stronger HCI engagement. We should note that there is limited empirical work exploring the experience of using Bitcoin and the issues of trust surrounding it. First we start by describing the Bitcoin stakeholders, grouped by Shcherbak (2014) in four categories: users, miners, exchanges and merchants. Users are people who use Bitcoin to buy goods and services from Bitcoin merchants. Merchants are businesses which accept Bitcoins as medium of exchange for goods and services and are connected to the Bitcoin network. Exchanges are the providers of online trading platforms where the registered members can exchange their Bitcoins for traditional currency and vice versa. Miners are those Bitcoin stakeholders who can record transactions (and collect reward) after they successfully solved cryptopuzzles (Eyal and Sirer, 2014).

Users’ Trust in Bitcoin One specific challenge pertaining to users is their limited knowledge of how Bitcoin technology works and how they need to protect their bitcoins. Keeping bitcoins on one’s computer involves security risks similar to keeping large sums of cash in one’s physical wallet (Bitcoin Wiki, 2011). Although Bitcoin is decentralized and at large has no single point of failure, it is nevertheless susceptible to a form of denial of service (Quora Forum, 2011) or double-spending attack (Karame, 2012). 

Merchants’ Trust in Bitcoin Merchants’ trust is challenged by their limited knowledge about buyers, and whether their payment will be received in time or at all (Shcherbak, 2014). They also lack the ability to track reliable buyers with whom they have previously engaged in positive transactions. 

Impact of Miners’ and Exchanges’ on Bitcoin Social Trust We know little about the trust challenges faced by these stakeholders. However, exchanges are crucial in supporting users’ and merchants’ trust, and at large the social trust within Bitcoin system. For example, exchanges have no audit process and no verification procedures (Bitcoin Forum, 2010). Equally, although each transaction should be digitally signed and secure after being verified by an unknown miner, we know little about mechanisms trailing miners’ competence and integrity. Recent work has shown that the reward structure which incentivize miners to contribute to the system and its decentralized nature, can motivate some miners to circumvent the Bitcoin protocol and mine selfishly at the cost of honest miners (Eyal and Sirer, 2014). This suggests that issues of trust can also develop within the same stakeholder category. 

Governments’ Trust in Bitcoin Bitcoin is a protocol promoted as the first peer-to-peer institution, offering alternative to central banks (Abramowitz, 2014). It has been argued that the demand for peer-to-peer transactions can be an indication for the development of trust in Bitcoin (Bitcoin.org, 2014). In this context is useful revisiting the main components of peer-to-peer governance- as a mechanism for institutional trust in Bitcoin: arbitration, trust, bank, business association and public law. For example, peer-to-peer protocols can offer structure through a set of rules for controlling the Bitcoin technology. Peer-to-peer protocol can also be used as a by governments to develop a structured legal framework for Bitcoin technology. In peer-to-peer decision making, arbitration is one way to resolve disputes (Thornburg, 2012). If peer-to-peer arbitration is able to serve decisions, then it could also serve as the foundation for peer-to-peer trust. It would be beneficial for trustee to be able to invest deposited bitcoins to grow their trust corpus (Abramowitz, 2014). However the challenge in crypto currency is there is no mechanism allowing such accounts to own virtual assets. In order to own the assets, there is a need of an intermediary link between virtual and the real world. Indeed a crypto currency bank may able to establish this connection. If the peer-to-peer bank is able to accept bank funds, make investment decisions, and approve expenditures, then peer-to-peer decision making can be used to operate the peer-to-peer business association (Abramowitz, 2014). A significant obstacles to private peer-to-peer institutions, is government hostility (Abramowitz, 2014). Despite lacking trust, peer-to-peer systems can yet produce decisions with a high degree of consensus. This limited form of decision-making inherent in Bitcoin technology could serve as a foundation for more sophisticated types of decision-making mechanisms, allowing legal institutions to be created without the designation of a central authority