BACKGROUND We provide a brief history on CS & IT education in India along with the evolution of HCI over the years.

History of IT and CS education in India The first formal computer science program in India was introduced in 1980 [55]. Currently there are over 10,000 institutes in India that offer engineering degrees; nearly as many institutions offer CS & IT degrees. Several computing bodies and prestigious conferences have a presence in India, including an official ACM office and a Grace Hopper Conference-India. Students are generally pushed into medicine and engineering, including IT and CS by parents [55]. The undergraduate program is generally rigid—curricula are fixed with little flexibility to try out different courses, and switching majors means re-starting the program from year one.

Growth of the Indian IT industry The Indian IT and IT-enabled services industry is a highgrowth sector, contributing 9.5% of the GDP in 2016, employing 3.9 million people directly and generating USD 120 billion annually in revenue [34]. The history of IT growth in India can roughly be divided into three phases. In the first phase, India emerged as a destination for outsourcing and ’offshore’ business processing office (BPO) jobs. Growth of the IT industry began after 1991 when India defaulted on its debts to the IMF, hence liberalizing its laws for the IT industry as a new growth engine. Concessions were created to open new software ‘technology parks’ with satellite technology to manage off-shore client requirements. The industry further saw a spurt in growth in 2004 when the new government declared “IT as India’s tomorrow,” creating infrastructural reforms in banks and public sector to install software infrastructures [55]. Entire suburban technology townships emerged, such as Hyderabad’s HITEC city, Bangalore’s Electronic City, and Chennai’s IT corridor. In its second phase in late 2000s, Indian engineering talent and vast consumer base attracted software development offices of multinational corporations like Cisco, Google, and Microsoft (India was often the site of these firms’ first engineering centers outside the Global North). In its third phase as a more mature technology industry in 2012, India attracted over 4 billion USD in venture capital funding [2] with over 4,500 homegrown start-ups [54]. More than 50% of the incubators were set up between 2012-17 [54]. Many of these startups have been successful in gaining user adoption among Indians, such as Flipkart, Myntra and Saavn.

HCI in India HCI growth in India has not kept pace with the growth of the software industry. HCI is offerred as an elective at some universities; an HCI track was offered as part of a Bachelor in Design degree at the Indian Institute of Technology (IIT) Guwahati in 2003; but HCI is not offered as a full program at the undergraduate level in any Indian university. Only two central universities offer a PhD in Interaction Design currently (IIT Guwahati and IIT Bombay).

But, the field is growing. The first HCI conference was organized in 2004 by the HCI Professional Association of India, with close to 30 attendees. It is now held annually and invites conferences like Interact to India. The Indian HCI community has an informal mailing list with around 2,700 members since circa 2001 but the forum is active mainly for administrative purposes only. Practitioners in our study estimated the size of the HCI community to be around 10,000 people (compare this with 600,000 students graduating in CS every year).

With India transitioning from outsourcing work to product development for its own consumers, HCI is increasingly integrated into Indian product development cycles. HCI and UX jobs are growing in industry, for user researchers, visual/interaction designers and prototypers. 

