DISCUSSION Our findings suggest a number of ways in which technology companies, Indian policy-makers, and academic institutions could support women in computing and HCI careers. We divide our discussion into those that we believe are broadly societal and hence more challenging to change, and those which we believe the CHI community can address.

Better workplace policies Solutions used in gender-equal countries to address the “leaky pipeline” in the workplace should be considered in Indian technology firms and universities, as the problems seem to be similar and at least as problematic. Everything from gender-equal parental leave policies, to diversity workshops, to systematic recruiting outreach to women is likely to have some impact. Re-integration back into work and fair, consensual assignment of work roles after long leaves are crucial to equitable treatment (see [67] for potential solutions). Work from home is problematic without corresponding policies on inclusively integrating remote employees. Everyday biases could be significantly reduced by regularly sensitizing employees about their unconscious biases, especially those resulting out of ignorance and blind adherence to social norms [41]. Technology firms should be called to take up global gender-equity causes publicly. Fair and inclusive environments further enable equal female participation in various aspects of HCI research and practice, such as fieldwork, brainstorming, design critique, or usability studies. Ultimately, gender parity of HCI researchers enables better design for end-users as a whole [4, 5, 19].

Familial support systems Our research points out that it is insufficient to have early CS education or a passion for computing; without the support of family members and society, women will continue to face the burden of navigating social norms in making progress in their careers. To erode societal stigma against PhDs for women, parents of junior practitioners and researchers may be targeted in re-shaping deeply ingrained societal attitudes on women’s gender roles (see, for example, [66]). Partners in later stages should be included in efforts to encourage women’s career successes, since they are crucial in financial and emotional support, and earning the backing of in-laws. This may take the shape of easily accessible programs for parents or partners to code, enabling ‘take your parents or spouse to work’ day more widely, and open house fora (such as the Indian Institute of Science’s Open Day initiative for parents). These initiatives expose family members firsthand to the benefits of being in senior management, instill empathy, and make computing more human-friendly. It may be helpful to run social marketing campaigns that highlight women with PhDs who also have “successful” families. Of course, any such messaging must take pluralistic viewpoints into account, such as not further stigmatizing unmarried women or those with non-heteronormative identities and not marginalizing those who may not live with or have immediate family members. There may be technology solutions at the margins, mediating between parents and their daughters. For two decades now, many arranged marriages in India begin online with matching sites such as Shaadi.com. Such sites could offer options for women’s families to identify men who support prospective partners’ further education or prefer highly qualified women.

More relatable role models Relatable role models serve an important role for the entire family as much as they do for the scholar or student (in contrast to lack of role models for only the individual in the United States [62]). However, as noted earlier, local, aspirational role models are difficult to locate within social circles. (Role models are nearly impossible if the female scholar is from a village and is the first person to break the patriarchal norms around education.) Technology and mass media platforms have an important role to play here in serving aspirational local figures and their stories, across a spectrum of gender roles, class, language, and sexuality, and improving discoverability of this content (see, for example, [66, 69, 22]. 

Financial support for advanced education Given that family support for women to pursue CS degrees starts high at the undergraduate level, scholarships and subsidies for women seem best targeted to master’s degrees and PhDs. Such support would enhance women’s agency to pursue advanced higher education, to make up for waning familial resources and moral support. As seen above, not only do financial incentives serve a practical purpose of avoiding student debt or placing less financial burden on parents; they further serve a symbolic purpose for the family, in an Indian context where certificates, photo opportunities, and publicity carry tremendous weight through validation (family validation is an important missing piece in the funding issues noted by [25], [66]). The pressure to get married at this life stage is countered indirectly through scholarships, which provide families the social status and currency, at the same time allow the daughters to study further. Unfortunately there are not enough women-centric scholarships in India, and even if they exist, the awareness is limited to elite universities—making these programs discoverable is key to wider impact on women.

Public engagement of HCI The same socio-cultural factors that make CS degrees desirable work against HCI education and practice in this milieu; HCI falls under design and arts, which are not seen as feeder channels for software jobs (complementing US-based insights [19, 18]). The highlighting of HCI as a career option within computing could serve to draw more women into the field, enable more software jobs, develop synergies with computer science research and coworkers, and allow academic publications to be viewed as computing contributions, while also providing women more options when negotiating with their families. The breadth of the field allows the pursuit of careers that some women may find preferable to those involving engineering alone. Should there be “Girls Who HCI” programs alongside “Girls Who Code”? At the same time, HCI researchers and practitioners can expand their role as the conscience of the tech sector, by bringing gender issues to light.

Gainful employment in HCI Our research points to the importance of job prospects in the pursuit of educational disciplines (indeed, job stability is one of the core factors for pursuing computing). Universities offering HCI should highlight its career possibilities that may satisfy a broader array of women’s occupational preferences, while remaining within the technology sector. The field of HCI may require a push to more strongly associate with the discipline of computer science and be less segregated in nontechnical fields like arts, as in the US where HCI is housed primarily in CS and Information Science departments. Gainful HCI employment is crucial to choosing the specialization (one reason why some of our engineer participants took up HCI degrees in the United States); the HCI community has a critical role to play in industry and academic job creation. 

Relevance to other Global South contexts And, what about lessons that can be drawn for other countries? One outcome of our interviews that deserves closer scrutiny is the apparent lack of gender-based ability disparities in India. Girls seemed just as confident as boys in STEM subjects. More research is required, but the gender-equal countries could undoubtedly learn from the strengths of India’s approach, of early introduction of computing, lack of gender stereotypes in schools, and positive aspirations around the fields of computing. Other gender-unequal countries could learn from the upward mobility associated with computing, financial independence for women, and the creation of a prosperous IT industry. India, Namibia, South Africa, Brazil and Pakistan are some of the few gender-unequal countries to offer HCI-related programs. While India’s HCI challenges are many, extending the research to other gender-unequal countries where HCI is up-and-coming amidst similar aspirational values around the technology sector can help understand gender challenges.

Beyond that, however, our findings offer a few practical recommendations for the gender-equal contexts. Parents cannot be expected to exert hard pressure on their girl children to enter computer science, and even persuasive tactics based on greater financial and marriage prospects seem fraught. As noted by some work in cross-cultural sociology, occupational gender disparities are greater in gender-equal countries for reasons linked to an indulging of essentialist stereotypes [11]. Perhaps the largest lesson of our study for contexts where concern about women’s representation in technology is significant is further confirmation that gender disparities in the technology sector are not inevitable. Cultural forces lead to great variation in the representation of women, and can presumably be changed over time with concerted effort.