METHODOLOGY We gathered data on Indian women and computing through 39 semi-structured interviews and 3 focus groups. We conducted a total of 50 hours of interviews and 8 hours of observations. Table 1 summarizes participant demographics. 

The study was designed to include Indian women in all stages in the tech sector, spanning industry IT practice as well as academic research. The sampling aimed for a mix of geographical origin and site of university education (India and USA). The interviews were conducted with female undergraduate (UG) and graduate (PG/PhD) students in computer science, HCI students (HCI), IT employees (IT), and both junior (JR) and senior (SR) professors, industry research scientists (IR) in computer science and UX researchers (UX) in industry. We additionally interviewed HCI professionals in India who pioneered HCI in India, both in academia as well as in industry.

University students (undergraduate, master’s, and PhD.) were those who attended top-tier national and regional universities in India, some of whom also had experience with graduate school in the United States. The students were recruited through university faculty, Android developer groups, Women Techmakers events, and snowballing. Research scientists and IT professionals were identified through university and corporate websites and contacted by e-mail. Faculty in our study were recruited from premier computer science research universities in India through e-mail.

Almost all of the interviews were conducted in person, with the exception of two interviews conducted via video calls. Interviews were audio-recorded and transcribed. Interviews were conducted in English, the language of choice of our participants. Though we did not constrain recruiting by sexual identity or orientation, all of our participants identified as heterosexual cis-gender women.

Observations of computer science events and initiatives were conducted during June 2016-August 2017. These were conducted at Lean In Bangalore, Technovation in the San Francisco Bay Area, and Google Science Fair in New Delhi.

Study Questions The interviews were designed to capture major motivating factors, challenges and experiences with respect to computing education and careers at various life stages. The questions were focused on childhood years, formal education up to university, university education, and professional life, with an emphasis on eliciting concrete personal stories. The interview protocol included questions about participants’ women peers and gender biases, personal and professional experiences, and sex-based discrimination faced in their place of work. Participants in HCI professions were additionally asked about the challenges of HCI research in India. 

Data Analysis We carried out a structured, qualitative data analysis to summarize and interpret the interview data we collected. Our analysis approach drew from related literature and existing theoretical understanding of the subject. Interview data were analyzed using a general inductive approach [63]. Interview transcripts were read multiple times, affinity clusters were developed, and key themes were derived and iteratively refined. The emergent themes were aligned with life stages, which provides the organizational structure in our findings.